CS 4346: Artificial Intelligence-Fall 2025
Project #2
Due Date: November 12, 2025
1. Form a team of a maximum of three students. Please email the names of your team members to
me very soon. -5 points if I do not get it by October 22.
2. Develop programs by implementing algorithms MINMAX-A-B (PowerPoint slide in SCP #6 as
well as given at the end of this project description) in C or C++ language. You can use any AI tools,
but the source code must be based on the algorithms MINMAX-A-B. Discuss with the instructor
if you wish to use any other programming language.
3. Develop and run your source code to play the Tic-Tac-Toe game in your project #2 Use the
evaluation function discussed in the class as well as create additional evaluation functions (One
function per team member). Four evaluation functions for the team of three team members.
4. You will be running both programs on Computer (one for Max and one for Min) against each
other. To evaluate the performance of each evaluation function, you will be running your
programs six times for all the four evaluation functions, as indicated below:
o Max (Running MinMax A-B with EV#1) verses Min (Running MinMax A-B with EV #2)
o Max (Running MinMax A-B with EV#1) verses Min (Running MinMax A-B with EV #3)
o Max (Running MinMax A-B with EV#1) verses Min (Running MinMax A-B with EV #4)
o Max (Running MinMax A-B with EV#2) verses Min (Running MinMax A-B with EV #3)
o Max (Running MinMax A-B with EV#2) verses Min (Running MinMax A-B with EV #4)
o Max (Running MinMax A-B with EV#3) verses Min (Running MinMax A-B with EV #4)
5. You are expected to develop the program as a team. After the program is developed and tested with
the evaluation functions, each member of the team will work separately to do the following sections
5-1 and 5-2:
5-1. Execute your programs with these combinations which will let you analyze the performance of each
evaluation function by tabulating the total number of nodes generated, total number of nodes
expanded, execution time, the size of memory used by the program, and winning/losing
statistics.
For example: Comparing the total number of nodes generated and expanded,
execution time, the size of memory used by the program, and winning/losing
statistics of the run Max (Running MinMax A-B with EV#1) versus the total
number of nodes generated and expanded, execution time, the size of memory
used by the program, and winning/losing statistics of the run Min (Running
MinMax A-B with EV #2) will let you compare the performance of the
Evaluation function #1 versus the Evaluation function #2. In the Analysis of
Results section, Analyze the tabulated results of all combinations and determine
which evaluation functions are better. Write the conclusions you draw from these
analyses.
2
5-2. Write the project report which must be in the required format and must include each team member's
contributions, detailed descriptions of the problem, domain, methodologies, the source code
implementations, source code, run time results, analysis of the program, and the analysis of results.
Program Runs: For each run, show the initial state, intermediate states as they are generated, the final
state when it is reached, and finally, the path generated by your program. Note that writing an efficient
and working program is only one-half of the project. The other half of the project is to present it in the
best possible understandable form in the report as well as in the demo.
PROJECT DEMO: The requested teams will demonstrate the performance of the program in Dr. Ali’s
office,
Warning: EACH STUDENT MUST PERFORM STEPS 5-1 TO 5-2 INDIVIDUALLY. DO NOT
COPY PROGRAMS FROM ANY SOURCE. ALSO, DO NOT COPY THE REPORT FROM
YOUR PARTNER OR ANY OTHER PERSON.
Project Submission Instructions
REPORT SUBMISSION:
• Upload your project report on CANVAS as a files. You cannot use attachments,
everything should be in the report. [ABSOLUTELY NO EMAILS; Minus 50 points
for email submissions] and make sure it can be downloaded easily.
• Also, upload a Readme file containing detailed instructions on how to run your program.
Check if the instructions work.
SOURCE CODE and related files SUBMISSION:
Besides including the source code in the report, you should also upload source code files as well
as other files needed to run your program and verify your results. The source code file naming
convention must be: Project2-student ID.cpp; The Naming convention of other files will be
similar except for the file extensions.
The file uploading instructions are given below:
Login to CANVAS
Access CS 4346 Fall 2025 course, then follow the following steps:
• Click on [Assignments].
• Select Project #2
• Click on ‘Submit Assignment’
• Choose your Files one by one, and UPLOAD them
• Agree to the tool’s End-User License Agreement
• Click on ‘Submit Assignment’
3
Algorithms to be Used in the Source Code.
MINIMAX-A-B (CURRENT),0, PLAYER-ONE, Maximum value STATIC can
compute, Minimum value STATIC can compute)
These initial values for Use-Thresh and Pass-Thresh represent the worst
values that each side could achieve.
Algorithm: MINIMAX-A-B (Position, Depth, Player, Use-Thresh, Pass
Thresh)
1. If DEEF-ENOUGH(Position, Depth) then return the structure
VALUE= STATIC (Position, Player);
PATH=nil
2. Otherwise, generate one more ply of the tree by calling the function
MOVE-GEN (Position, Player) and setting SUCCESSORS to the list it returns.
3. If SUCCESSORS is empty, there are no moves to be made: return the same
structure that would have been returned if DEEP-ENOUGH had returned TRUE.
4. If SUCCESSORS is not empty, then go through it, examining each element
and keeping track of the best one. This is done as follows,
For each element SUCC of SUCCESSORS:
(a) Set RESULT-SUCC to
MINIMAX-A-B (SUCC, Depth+ 1, OPPOSITE (Player), -Pass-Thresh,-Use
-Thresh).
(b) Set NEW-VALUE to -VALUE (RESULT-SUCC).
(c) If NEW-VALUE> Pass-Thresh, then we have found a successor that
is better than any we have examined so far. Record this by doing the following,
i. Set Pass-Thresh to NEW-VALUE.
ii. The best-known path is now from CURRENT to SUCC and
then on to the appropriate path from SUCC as determined by the recursive call to
MINIMAX-A-B. So set BEST-PATH to the result of attaching SUCC to the front
of PATH (RESULT-SUCC).
(d) If Pass-Thresh (reflecting the current best value) is not better than
Use-Thresh, then we should stop examining this branch. But both thresholds and
values have been inverted. So, if Pass-Thresh>= Use Thresh, then return
immediately with the value
VALUE= Pass-Thresh
PATH= BEST-PATH
5. Return the structure
VALUE= Pass-Thresh
PATH= BEST-PATH
4
CS 4346- Project #2 Report Format:
[Please note that it is just a format. For project
requirements, you must read the project
description given above].
Each item below must be described in detail. [Rubric
points in brackets]
The project should be completed using the instructions given in the project
description above, but the format of the report should be as given below. The
descriptions of each item should be long enough to understand it clearly.
• Title Page: Write the title, full name of the author, Names of other Team
members, dates of submission. [1]
• The Problem Description: Explain the problem for which you have
developed the Game Playing program. [2]
• The Domain: Explain the Domain of the problem which is games. [2]
• Methodologies: Explain in detail the methodology (MinMax -AB) you
are using. [At least two pages long] [7]
• Source Code Implementation and Inclusion of a copy in
the Report: Explain in detail how the source code was developed, and
the algorithm MinMax- AB was implemented into the source code. Also,
explain important features you have implemented. [At least one page long]
[25]
5
• Inclusion of a copy of the full source code in the report:
You must Attach a copy of the source code. It must not be in an attachment.
[10]
• A Copy of the program Run and Tabulation of Results:
Provide a copy of all of the six program runs and provide a copy of the
developed table of program runs output. [16]
• Analysis of the program: Explain in detail what features you have
added or modified and why. [At least one page long] [16]
• Analysis of the results: Analyze the results of the runs provided in
the table. Explain in detail the effect on the results of your program
implementations and modified features. [At least one page long] [16]
• Conclusion: Explain the conclusion and what you learned from the
project. [2]
• Team Members’ Contributions: You must explain in detail the
contribution of each team member in detail. Team members are expected to
contribute to the project equally, particularly in source code development.
[3]
• References: Add all the references you have consulted in completing the
project.
• If Demo is requested from a team and it is not provided
[-50]